---
title: "answers and spirituality"
categories: 
  - "non-geeky"
  - "spirituality"
draft: true
---

I have a google alert set up for "open money" which yielded an alert toÂ [this post on yenom.biz](http://yenom.biz/?p=45). Â I love how this post is almost a direct answer to me, but in fact wasn't but still I picked it up via google alerts! Â What wild and whacky world we live in.Â Â Â I loved this post. Â It seems that Zack really didn't like my reference to spiritual experience. Â I have no argument with Zacks points. Â What is the difference between the spiritual and the mundane? Â I certainly couldn't tell you. Â But this post does give me venue to write down something I've come to see over the last years, that's about knowing.I've always been very interested in understanding how it is that I know something. Â The feeling of knowing that I know fascinates me. Â How do I know that I know that I know? Hehe. Â It makes me giddy. Â So here's what I've come up with. Â Reality is perceptible to me through various physiological systems. Â Each such system provides me access to a new level of knowing. Â The base level, the sensory nerve layer (which senses pressure, temperature, sound, light) I share with the simpleÂ planarian, and gives me one level of knowing of those direct physical properties. Â The next level up, the reptilian-brain, gives me a whole new level of knowing, knowing about the self through proprio-reception, control of muscles, complex olfactory sense, capacity for fight or flight, etc.. Â The next level after that, the limbic-brain provides yet another level of knowing, the knowledge of pain and pleasure and other emotions. Â The capacity to experience fear, or arousal, or anger, these are forms of knowing about how I stand in relation to crucial aspects of my environment. Â Â Â The next level up, mamillian brain Â Lets start with the lowest: direct nerve physical sense perceptions. Â My skin feels pressure and temperature, my ears hear sounds, my nose smells, etc. Â Through these perceptions I know something basic things about reality. Â Many simple creatures share these same capacities for sensing reality and indeed the know about reality through them. Â But the next step up in knowing, comes with the addition of aÂ physiologicalÂ system knows as the limbic system, or the reptilian brain. Â Reptiles know much more about reality than planeria. Â
